# getblocktemplatelight

```
Title: getblocktemplatelight
Type: API/RPC
Version: 1.0.2
Status: Draft
Created: 2020-04-28
Authors: freetrader <freetrader@tuta.io>
         Calin Culianu <calin.culianu@gmail.com>
         Dagur Valberg Johannsson <dagurval@pvv.ntnu.no>
         BigBlockIfTrue <info@bitcoinlogo.eu>
License: CC0-1.0
Comments-URI: https://gitlab.com/bitcoin-cash-node/bitcoin-cash-node/-/merge_requests/284
Comments-Summary: BCHN internal review comments.
```

## Abstract

A set of RPC calls are proposed to implement a faster, lighter
getblocktemplate [1,2] mechanism, referred to below by the
abbreviation 'GBTL' (for "getblocktemplate light").

## Motivation

Significant time in obtaining block templates and submitting block candidates
can be saved by exchanging more concise transaction data (in the form of
Merkle branch hashes instead of the full list of transaction id hashes) and
caching these template "jobs" in a way that allows submission of far less
data once a block has been mined.

The submitted block can be reconstructed from a submitted valid header and
a job id identifying the transaction hashes which are stored on disk or in
memory.

At the time of writing, getblocktemplatelight is the de facto standard in
parts of the Chinese mining community. This document is a formalization of
this protocol (see also Appendix A).

## Terms and conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

## Specification

Two new RPC calls are introduced: `getblocktemplatelight` and
`submitblocklight`.

### `getblocktemplatelight`

This call returns concise information that can be used by a miner to
construct a valid block header based on a chosen coinbase transaction.

#### GBTL-RETURN-VALUES-REQ-1

The getblocktemplatelight RPC call SHALL return

1. a job id (JSON string) not exceeding 128 bytes.
   The exact job id structure is implementation-dependent.

2. a list of Merkle path hashes to allow miner to quickly construct
   a valid header by computing the Merkle root once he decides on a
   coinbase transaction.

NOTE: The first element of the Merkle path list will be a transaction hash
      (the first transaction is hashed with the future coinbase transaction).
      Refer to Appendix B for information on how the Merkle root is computed.
      Implementations are allowed to impose more severe size restrictions
      on the size of the job id string, for example the Bitcoin Cash Node
      implementation uses 40 characters.

#### GBTL-INPUT-ADDITIONAL-TXS-1

The getblocktemplate call SHALL support an optional input argument
consisting of a JSON array of strings which contain hex encoded
transactions that must be included in the future block in addition
to the transactions proposed by the software.

NOTE! Such additional transactions are not validated by the software.
It is the responsibility of the miner to ensure such transactions are
valid, do not conflict with each other, and do not conflict with any
transaction in the mempool. If he fails to do so, an invalid block could be
generated.

#### GBTL-INPUT-ADDITIONAL-TXS-2

If the additional_txs contain data that cannot be deserialized as a
transaction, the software shall raise RPC_DESERIALIZATION_ERROR (code -22).

Optionally, it should provide an indication of which of the additional_txs
failed to deserialize.

#### GBTL-JOB-ID-REQ-1

The job id generated by getblocktemplate SHALL uniquely identify the
invariant block header data and non-coinbase transactions included in the
block.

NOTE: this means that repeated calls to getblocktemplatelight may return
the same job id as long as the template header information and the
proposed set of transaction (resulting in a given Merkle path) has not
changed.

#### GBTL-JOB-PERSIST-REQ-1

The running software SHALL persist an implementation-defined number of
jobs, at least in memory but optionally they can be stored on disk
(this is up to an implementation - see GBTL-JOB-PERSIST-REQ-2).

For each job, the full list of transactions (excluding future coinbase)
SHALL be stored to allow quick reassembly of the block once a miner submits
a valid header using the `submitblocklight` call.

#### (optional) GBTL-JOB-PERSIST-REQ-2

An implementation-defined number of jobs SHOULD persist across a stop-start
cycle of the node software (implementing this requires some form of
persistent storage of jobs).

#### (optional) GBTL-JOB-PERSIST-REQ-3

An implementation-defined number of jobs SHOULD persist across a power
cycle of the node (also requires persistent storage of jobs).

#### (optional) GBTL-JOB-PERSIST-REQ-4

The number of jobs to persist (in memory or disk) SHOULD be configurable.

#### (optional) GBTL-JOB-PERSIST-REQ-5

The storage location of jobs persisted on disk SHOULD be configurable.

#### (optional) GBTL-JOB-CLEAN-REQ-1

If an implementation persists jobs on disk for some time, then it SHOULD
offer a configurable mechanism for them to be automatically deleted in order
to conserve disk space.

### `submitblocklight`

This call submits a serialized block (consisting of only header plus a
single coinbase transaction) and a job id (encoded as a string) which is
used by the software to look up the remaining transactions, complete the
block and submit it to the network.

The table below gives information about the serialized block data that is
expected.

| Field Name | Type             | Size         | Encoding            | Purpose |
| ---        | ---              | ---          | ---                 | ---     |
| header     | block header     | 80 bytes     | standard, see [5]   | The header of the block being provided |
| txn_count  | compactSize uint | variable (1) | standard, see [6]   | The number of transactions in the block (must be 1 in this case) |
| coinbase   | raw transaction  | variable (2) | standard, see [7,8] | The coinbase of the block being provided |

Notes:

(1) Since the value of this field must be 1, its size is effectively fixed at 1 byte.

(2) The coinbase field has an enforced minimum size of 100 bytes.
    Also, block construction typically reserves some space for the coinbase.
    For example, in the Bitcoin Cash Node software a maximum of 1000 bytes are
    reserved for the coinbase by default - this should be taken into account when
    a larger coinbase needs to be included.

#### GBTL-SUBMIT-CHECK-REQ-1

Upon receiving a job id and serialized block data, the software SHALL
verify that the job information is available or raise an error with a
message indicating that the job data could not be found.

#### GBTL-SUBMIT-CHECK-REQ-2

Upon receiving a job id and serialized block data, the software SHALL
verify that it only contains a single transaction which must be a coinbase
transaction or else an RPC error is raised with a message indicating that
the block must only contain a single coinbase transaction.

#### GBTL-SUBMIT-PROCESS-REQ-1

After validating the preconditions of job and block data, the software SHALL
reassemble the entire block from the list of transactions stored for the job
and subject the block for further processing (as a newly found block would
be - same as is done by `submitblock`).

## Rationale

The maximum length of the job id has been chosen as 128 characters in order
to fit a hex representation of a SHA512 hash value. In practice
implementations may use shorter job ids based on whatever they see fit.

## Considerations for future improvement

1. An additional safety feature related to this could be added to validate
   additional transactions passed to `getblocktemplatelight`
   (see Note under GBTL-INPUT-ADDITIONAL-TXS-REQ-1).

## Reference implementation

A C++ reference implementation is available in Bitcoin Cash Node
[merge request 281](https://gitlab.com/bitcoin-cash-node/bitcoin-cash-node/-/merge_requests/281).

## Example outputs

```
$ bitcoin-cli getblocktemplatelight
{
  "capabilities": [
    "proposal"
  ],
  "version": 536870912,
  "previousblockhash": "0000000000000000042c6826483e2685eaef05e5453629c942d80ff181b7ee56",
  "job_id": "99316ebfef1808a7c7280bcebcf5a1695469e28e",
  "merkle": [
    "001c508a25ba65ba917dd9149cb33cb50eb7806fceed1f03ee72d8765e0b12da",
    "7aa030049cc0886263a524f4b3480e129881ed338a4058c428d8207d55248f75",
    "ddaca54ad69f000fd936f8e18a72a48475a600523157d998a3237dc7b6714855",
    "2db245d92e7a2ce758ffc5c92227ea71fe5600d4a03b6242214bfd8f422f343c",
    "aa3c9c1d0cbc276c2ef59037fdb444cc6f8957c6ff705444bf632d61b8671f74",
    "6841ab7320310b44028e1993247da489612eff893fe935af31db21701867a072",
    "7de33d790ceca3d21b3e53c7aa7ca463aac248c4497b26b38ae935ce200e72c4",
    "e05b643007ba1722c0660f7c650dc174f67c3058061c83897f46b7e23dfb08b2",
    "415b3a646bd8ebc7faffebc7bb282067e3e0ebc3025c828ae90dfeceed58253b",
    "7c5982ab62e5608ad138d2fb81b8ed7d155cf604dc38113463bda51249a1df0f",
    "32589d2dec148272240bee5410cff8111b895c36e907a9fabbc29978f646fde3"
  ],
  "coinbaseaux": {
    "flags": ""
  },
  "coinbasevalue": 625822167,
  "longpollid": "0000000000000000042c6826483e2685eaef05e5453629c942d80ff181b7ee56109391",
  "target": "0000000000000000046ae3000000000000000000000000000000000000000000",
  "mintime": 1588182851,
  "mutable": [
    "time",
    "job_id",
    "merkle",
    "prevblock"
  ],
  "noncerange": "00000000ffffffff",
  "sigoplimit": 640000,
  "sizelimit": 32000000,
  "curtime": 1588193732,
  "bits": "18046ae3",
  "height": 632977
}
```

## Appendices

### Appendix A - Historical context

This specification is based on an adaptation by Bitcoin Cash Node of a
concept originally implemented by BTC.com (at least as far as we know).
The original implementation is available at [3].

Bitcoin Unlimited has previously released a similar feature (in v1.4.0.0
of its client) consisting of two RPC calls called `getminingcandidate`
and `submitminingsolution` [9].

There is an ASCII diagram with additional explanations of the Merkle
branch construction in the Bitcoin Cash Node source code [4].

### Appendix B - Computation of Merkle root from coinbase + branch

Below is pseudo-code for the computation of the Merkle root from a
coinbase transaction and the Merkle branch hashes provided by the
`getblocktemplatelight` command.

```
define sha256d( s ) := sha256( sha256( s ) )

let cb_hash = sha256d( coinbase_raw_tx )

// merkle_branch_hashes are the ordered list of hashes of the
// `merkle` output field of `getblocktemplatelight`
hashes = [ cb_hash ].append( merkle_branch_hashes )

loop while length( hashes ) > 1:
    hashes[0] = sha256d( concatenate( hashes[0], hashes[1] ) )
    delete hashes[1]

merkle_root = hashes[0]
```

## References

- [1] [BIP22: getblocktemplate - Fundamentals](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0022.mediawiki/)
- [2] [BIP23: getblocktemplate - Pooled Mining](https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0023.mediawiki/)
- [3] [https://github.com/btccom/bitcoin-abc-1/commit/e87774c8ee724a0e9ecbc289236920ea1aa04a83](https://github.com/btccom/bitcoin-abc-1/commit/e87774c8ee724a0e9ecbc289236920ea1aa04a83)
- [4] [src/rpc/mining.cpp](../src/rpc/mining.cpp), see `MakeMerkleBranch` function
- [5] [https://reference.cash/protocol/blockchain/block/block-header](https://reference.cash/protocol/blockchain/block/block-header)
- [6] [https://reference.cash/protocol/p2p/compact__int/](https://reference.cash/protocol/p2p/compact__int/)
- [7] [https://reference.cash/protocol/blockchain/block/#coinbase-transaction](https://reference.cash/protocol/blockchain/block/#coinbase-transaction)
- [8] [https://reference.cash/protocol/blockchain/transaction/](https://reference.cash/protocol/blockchain/transaction/)
- [9] [https://github.com/BitcoinUnlimited/BitcoinUnlimited/blob/release/doc/miner.md#getminingcandidate-and-submitminingsolution](https://github.com/BitcoinUnlimited/BitcoinUnlimited/blob/release/doc/miner.md#getminingcandidate-and-submitminingsolution)

## Copyright

This document is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal license.
